# May 16 2016 - Find me a number!

An interesting problem was presented to me today - given a sorted array and a number, find either that number, the next smallest number if that number doesn't exist in the array or -1. Okay, since I've been trying to get better at Python, I decided what better language to implement the solution in than Python.

## `argparse`

Oh man, `argparse` is awesome. It's a tool that comes built into Python starting 2.7 and helps you configure read arguments from the command line. It even adds a `-h` or `--help` argument out of the box so that your users can tell what the program is expecting. Tubular!

Start with creating a parser using `argparse.ArgumentParser` and give it a general `description` of what your program does. Then use `parser.add_argument` to tell `argparse` what to pick up from the command line. I used it to pick up a list of numbers, a number to find denoted by a `-f` or `--find` flag and whether to use the recursive implementation without any fuss.

And the documentation is simple to read while still being very thorough.

10/10 would parse again.

## First pass

Back to the problem! Seems easy enough, check some edge cases, go into a loop checking everything but the last element and return a value accordingly. Let's write some code!

```python
def find_number(num_list, target):
    # edge cases
    if not isinstance(num_list, list) or len(num_list) == 0 or target < num_list[0]:
        return -1
    elif target == num_list[0]:
        return num_list[0]
    elif target >= num_list[len(num_list) - 1]:
        return num_list[len(num_list) - 1]
    else:
        # start with the first element, end at the second to last since we've already
        # checked the last.
        for i in range(0, len(num_list) - 1):
            if num_list[i] == target:
                return num_list[i]
            elif num_list[i] < target and num_list[i + 1] > target:
                return num_list[i]
```

This way of doing it is called linear search.

What's the complexity? Linear. Can we make it better? Probably? I've learned that in most cases, that answer is yes.

## Second pass

How do we make it better? Well one solution could be binary searching through the array! Yeah! Check the same edge cases and start splitting the array into two each time and picking a side. Admittedly in my overzealousness about this solution, I missed the point of binary search and actually went down all possible branches all the time. *sigh* No bueno!

Time for actual binary searching!

```python
# check the same edge cases as above here
elif len(num_list) == 1:
    if target < num_list[0]:
        return -1
    elif target >= num_list[0]:
        return num_list[0]

else:
    half_length = int(len(num_list) / 2)

    if num_list[half_length] <= target:
        return find_number_rec(num_list[half_length:len(num_list)], target)
    else:
        return find_number_rec(num_list[0:half_length], target)
```

## Bonus: Iterative Binary Search

In all of my experience with implementing binary searches, I always did it recursively and so I never thought to implement it using a loop but github user monotkate helped me realize that a binary search can be implemented iteratively as well! This is how you would find a given number in an array.

```python
def find_number(numbers, target):
    min = 0
    max = len(numbers) - 1

    while max >= min:
        guess = int((max + min) / 2)
        if numbers[guess] == target:
            return numbers[guess]
        elif array[guess] < target:
            min = guess + 1
        else:
            max = guess + 1


    return -1
```
