# May 17 2016 - Activity Interactions in Android

First things first, how do I create a new activity? Each activity has 3 parts, a Java class, an XML layout and an `<activity>` tag in `AndroidManifest.xml`.

## `AndroidManifest.xml`

Let's talk about `AndroidManifest.xml` first. Since we're creating an activity that's going to be a child of the `MainActivity` class, we're going to set the `android:parentActivityName` attribute to `MainActivity`.

A note on backwards compatibility here, older versions of android are going to happily ignore the `android:parentActivityName` attribute so we have to add a `<meta-data>` tag as a child to the `<activity>` tag. Here is that code snippet.

```xml
<meta-data
    android:name="android.support.PARENT_ACTIVITY"
    android:value="com.yashdalfthegray.repeatingreminders.MainActivity" />
```

## Java class

Now, let's talk about the Java class. Every Android activity extends the `Activity` class given to you by the SDK. Since Android is all about compatibility, making sure you extend `AppCompatActivity` instead of `Activity` is going to make your life easier. Then all that needs to be done is overriding the `onCreate()` method (this is required) and any other activity lifecycle events you wish to hook into.

## XML Layout

This blank activity class is going to load up an empty layout so we add an XML layout to put stuff on the screen. This is where you sew together the Java and the layout code. To make our app look a little modern, we use a toolbar, there is of course an AppCompat version of that called `<android.support.v7.widget.Toolbar>` which should be nested in a `<android.support.design.widget.AppBarLayout>` for maximum Material-Design-ness.

## Wiring

Now we need to tell the Java code to use that toolbar as the support toolbar. We can do that by giving the toolbar an ID, finding that ID in the code and calling `setSupportToolbar()` with the layout.

```xml
<android.support.design.widget.AppBarLayout
    android:layout_width="match_parent"
    android:layout_height="wrap_content"
    android:theme="@style/AppTheme.AppBarOverlay"
    app:elevation="0dp">
    <android.support.v7.widget.Toolbar
        android:id="@+id/toolbar"
        android:layout_width="match_parent"
        android:layout_height="?attr/actionBarSize"
        android:background="@color/colorPrimary"
        app:popupTheme="@style/AppTheme.PopupOverlay" />
</android.support.design.widget.AppBarLayout>
```

```java
Toolbar toolbar = (Toolbar) findViewById(R.id.toolbar);
setSupportActionBar(toolbar);

// and since you should have a back arrow to get back to your parent activity
getSupportActionBar().setDisplayHomeAsUpEnabled(true);
```

## Starting our new activity from another one

Starting a new activity in android is simple. You use an `Intent` to tell Android that you want it to start a new activity. An `Intent` can be used to ask Android to start a named activity or tell it to ask the other apps installed if they support a certain function, at which point the user will be asked to make a choice. In this case, we're going to just name the activity but if you were sharing some content out of your app, you'd want to ask Android to provide the user with everything that can consume a share intent.

Here's how we start the `SettingsActivity` from the `MainActivity`

```java
startActivity(new Intent(this, SettingsActivity.class));
```

And that's how we create and start new activities in Android.
