# May 20 2016 - Memoization

## Background

Memoization (as I understand it) is storing the past result of an operation like a function call and using that result in the next function call. This basically prevents the computer from having to go through the process again for the same inputs. A common use for a memoizer is the javascript `reduce()` function. It iterates over a collection, running each item through a formula and starting at an initial state, memoizing the results till it reaches the end of the collection.

To sum an array in Jvascript

```javascript
[1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6].reduce((sum, n) => {
    return sum + n
}, 0);
```

Memoization is very helpul with processes that have to frequently act on the same set of inputs. The catch is that the function has to be a pure function, i.e. it has to return the same output for the same set of inputs.

## Fibonacci Sequence Term Generator

One of the cases that memoization really helps is when generating terms for the Fibonacci sequence. A simple recursive implementation is shown below.

```javascript
function generateFibonacciTerm(termNumber) {
    if (termNumber === 0 || termNumber === 1) {
        return 1;
    }
    else {
        return generateFibonacciTerm(termNumber - 1) + generateFibonacciTerm(termNumber - 2);
    }
}
```

When we call `generateFibonacciTerm(5)`, the function returns relatively quickly but when asked to generate the 40th term, there is a significant delay. Even with the case of generating the 10th term, this function is called upwards of 400 times. That's a lot of calls. This is where memoization can help. If we can cache the result of the previous call to the function, we don't have to recompute the same Fibonacci term. An example is given below.

```javascript
function memoizedFibonacciTerm(termNumber, cache) {
    if (termNumber < cache.length) {
        return cache[termNumber];
    }
    else if (termNumber === 0 || termNumber === 1) {
        return 1;
    }
    else {
        let result = memoizedFibonacciTerm(term - 1, cache) + memoizedFibonacciTerm(term - 2, cache);
        cache[termNumber] = result;
        return result;
    }
}
```
